[train] add XGBoostTrainer user guide (#52355)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/train/getting-started-xgboost.rst

Learn how to:

1. Configure a :ref:`training function <train-overview-training-function>` to report metrics and save checkpoints.
2. Configure :ref:`scaling <train-overview-scaling-config>` and CPU or GPU resource requirements for a training job.
3. Launch a distributed training job with a :class:`~ray.train.xgboost.XGBoostTrainer`.

Quickstart
----------

For reference, the final code is as follows:

.. testcode::
    :skipif: True

    from ray.train.xgboost import XGBoostTrainer
    from ray.train import ScalingConfig

    def train_func():
        # Your XGBoost training code here.
        ...

    scaling_config = ScalingConfig(num_workers=2, resources_per_worker={"CPU": 4})
    trainer = XGBoostTrainer(train_func, scaling_config=scaling_config)
    result = trainer.fit()

1. `train_func` is the Python code that executes on each distributed training worker.
2. :class:`~ray.train.ScalingConfig` defines the number of distributed training workers and whether to use GPUs.
3. :class:`~ray.train.xgboost.XGBoostTrainer` launches the distributed training job.

Compare a XGBoost training script with and without Ray Train.

.. tab-set::

>     .. tab-item:: XGBoost

Author: I want to keep it as Before then After to contextualize what is actually different

>     .. tab-item:: XGBoost

Reviewer: I like to have the quickstart with Ray Train immediately copy pastable. The reference code above this is just a dummy skeleton, so this is really the quickstart.

                )

            # 5. Configure scaling and resource requirements.
            scaling_config = ScalingConfig(num_workers=2, resources_per_worker={"CPU": 4})

            # 6. Launch distributed training job.
            trainer = XGBoostTrainer(
                train_func,
                scaling_config=scaling_config,
                datasets = {"train": train_dataset, "eval": eval_dataset},
                # If running in a multi-node cluster, this is where you
                # should configure the run's persistent storage that is accessible
                # across all worker nodes.
                # run_config=ray.train.RunConfig(storage_path="s3://..."),
            )
            result = trainer.fit()

            # 7. Load the trained model
            import os
            with result.checkpoint.as_directory() as checkpoint_dir:
                model_path = os.path.join(checkpoint_dir, RayTrainReportCallback.CHECKPOINT_NAME)
                model = xgboost.Booster()
                model.load_model(model_path)

Set up a training function
--------------------------

First, update your training code to support distributed training.

> Begin by wrapping your code in a :ref:`training function <train-overview-training-function>`:

Reviewer: Can you add a mention that the Scikit-learn estimator interface also works here?

Link to this: https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/en/latest/python/sklearn_estimator.html

.. testcode::
    :skipif: True

    def train_func():
        # Your model training code here.
        ...

Each distributed training worker executes this function.

You can also specify the input argument for `train_func` as a dictionary via the Trainer's `train_loop_config`. For example:

.. testcode:: python
    :skipif: True

    def train_func(config):
        label_column = config["label_column"]
        num_boost_round = config["num_boost_round"]

>         ...

Author: Do you mean add `config` to all other instances of the training function definition? We originally excluded from all the quickstarts to make it easier to onboard since not everyone needs it.

    config = {"label_column": "y", "num_boost_round": 10}
    trainer = ray.train.xgboost.XGBoostTrainer(train_func, train_loop_config=config, ...)

.. warning::

    Avoid passing large data objects through `train_loop_config` to reduce the

>     serialization and deserialization overhead. Instead, it's preferred to
>     initialize large objects (e.g. datasets, models) directly in `train_func`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    serialization and deserialization overhead. Instead,
    initialize large objects (e.g. datasets, models) directly in `train_func`.
```

    .. code-block:: diff

         def load_dataset():
             # Return a large in-memory dataset
             ...

         def load_model():
             # Return a large in-memory model instance
             ...

        -config = {"data": load_dataset(), "model": load_model()}

         def train_func(config):
        -    data = config["data"]
        -    model = config["model"]

        +    data = load_dataset()
        +    model = load_model()
             ...

         trainer = ray.train.xgboost.XGBoostTrainer(train_func, train_loop_config=config, ...)

> Ray Train automatically sets up the Rabit communicator for XGBoost, which handles the distributed communication between workers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ray Train automatically performs the worker communication setup that is needed to do distributed xgboost training.
```

Report metrics and save checkpoints
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To persist your checkpoints and monitor training progress, add a
:class:`ray.train.xgboost.RayTrainReportCallback` utility callback to your Trainer:

> .. code-block:: diff

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

     import xgboost
     from ray.train.xgboost import RayTrainReportCallback

     def train_func():
        ...
        bst = xgboost.train(
            ...,
            callbacks=[

>                 RayTrainReportCallback(
>                     metrics={"loss": "eval-logloss"}, frequency=1

Reviewer: the dict renaming map thing is a bit advanced/confusing. let's just keep the metric names that are returned by xgboost.

```suggestion
                RayTrainReportCallback(
                    metrics=["eval-logloss"], frequency=1
```

                )
            ],
        )
        ...

> Reporting metrics and checkpoints to Ray Train enables integration with Ray Tune and :ref:`fault-tolerant training <train-fault-tolerance>`.

Reviewer: nit: sounds a little bit like Ray Tune fault tolerant training right now

```suggestion
Reporting metrics and checkpoints to Ray Train enables :ref:`fault-tolerant training <train-fault-tolerance>` and the integration with Ray Tune.
```

Loading data
------------

> When running distributed XGBoost training, you will need each worker to access a different shard of the dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running distributed XGBoost training, each worker should use a different shard of the dataset.
```

.. testcode:: python
    :skipif: True

>     def get_train_dataset(world_rank) -> xgboost.DMatrix:
>         # Define logic to get the DMatrix for each worker

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    def get_train_dataset(world_rank: int) -> xgboost.DMatrix:
        # Define logic to get the DMatrix shard for this worker rank
```

        ...

    def get_eval_dataset(world_rank) -> xgboost.DMatrix:
        # Define logic to get the DMatrix for each worker
        ...

    def train_func():
        rank = ray.train.get_world_rank()
        dtrain = get_train_dataset(rank)
        deval = get_eval_dataset(rank)
        ...

> A common way to do this is to pre-shard the dataset, so each worker reads from a different partition of the dataset. 
> 
> For more flexibility, Ray Data provides a solution for sharding the dataset at runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A common way to do this is to pre-shard the dataset and then assign each worker a different set of files to read.

Pre-sharding the dataset is not very flexible to changes in the number of workers, since some workers may be assigned more data than others. For more flexibility, Ray Data provides a solution for sharding the dataset at runtime.
```

Use Ray Data to shard the dataset
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> :ref:`Ray Data <data>` is a distributed data processing library that allows you to easily shard and distribute your data across multiple workers. 

Reviewer: link ray train ray data guide

Author: This is referenced at the end of the section!

First, load your entire dataset as a Ray Data Dataset.

.. testcode:: python
    :skipif: True

    train_dataset = ray.data.from_parquet("s3://...")

>     eval_dataset = ray.data.from_parquet("s3://...")

Reviewer: reword this to highlight that you should pass the directory of ALL files into the read.

Also add a comment about how many different data sources are supported, and link to the read api reference.

> In the training function, you can access the dataset shards for this worker using :meth:`ray.train.get_dataset_shard`. Convert this into the DMatrix.

Reviewer: I think we can link xgboost.DMatrix to external xgboost docs

```suggestion
In the training function, you can access the dataset shards for this worker using :meth:`ray.train.get_dataset_shard`. Convert this into the native xgboost.DMatrix.
```

.. testcode:: python
    :skipif: True

    def get_dmatrix(dataset_name: str) -> xgboost.DMatrix:
        shard = ray.train.get_dataset_shard(dataset_name)
        df = shard.materialize().to_pandas()
        X, y = df.drop("target", axis=1), df["target"]
        return xgboost.DMatrix(X, label=y)

    def train_func():
        dtrain = get_dmatrix("train")
        deval = get_dmatrix("eval")

>         ...

Reviewer: for future: let's introduce a prepare_dmatrix utility API which can implement the pyarrow version of this to reduce copies.

Reviewer: Explain and show a diagram about the dataset being materialized at this point and being stored in the object store. 

Include details about how this is allows the dataset to be spread across multiple nodes' CPU memory.

Also mention the default 30% object store limit and how to modify this with the env variable and how to estimate how many nodes you need.

Author: Can I add a TODO for this? This is a bit more extensive and might be helpful to have as part of a more thorough Data + Train for XGBoost/LightGBM user guide.

.. testcode:: python
    :skipif: True

    trainer = XGBoostTrainer(..., datasets={"train": train_dataset, "eval": eval_dataset})
    trainer.fit()

For more details, see :ref:`data-ingest-torch`.

Configure scale and GPUs
------------------------

Outside of your training function, create a :class:`~ray.train.ScalingConfig` object to configure:

1. :class:`num_workers <ray.train.ScalingConfig>` - The number of distributed training worker processes.
2. :class:`use_gpu <ray.train.ScalingConfig>` - Whether each worker should use a GPU (or CPU).
3. :class:`resources_per_worker <ray.train.ScalingConfig>` - The number of CPUs or GPUs per worker.

.. testcode::

    from ray.train import ScalingConfig
    
    # 4 nodes with 8 CPUs each.
    scaling_config = ScalingConfig(num_workers=4, resources_per_worker={"CPU": 8})

    # 1 node with 8 CPUs and 4 GPUs each.
    scaling_config = ScalingConfig(num_workers=4, use_gpu=True)

    # 4 nodes with 8 CPUs and 4 GPUs each.
    scaling_config = ScalingConfig(num_workers=16, use_gpu=True)

> When using GPUs, you will also need to update your training function to use the GPU. This can be done by setting the `"device"` parameter as `"cuda"`.

Reviewer: link to https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/en/stable/gpu/index.html
